[K9CODESEC-2399] Document custom IaC rule authoring (#38250)
DataDog/documentation: hugo/content/en/security/code_security/iac_security/custom_rules/tutorial.md

---
title: Create Your First Custom IaC Rule
description: Create and test a custom Terraform rule that detects explicitly suspended S3 bucket versioning.
further_reading:
  - link: "/security/code_security/iac_security/custom_rules/"
    tag: "Documentation"
    text: "Custom IaC rules"
  - link: "/security/code_security/iac_security/custom_rules/guide/"
    tag: "Documentation"
    text: "Custom IaC rule reference"
  - link: "/security/code_security/iac_security/iac_rules/"
    tag: "Documentation"
    text: "Explore IaC Security rules"
---

## Overview

> This tutorial creates a Terraform rule that detects an `aws_s3_bucket_versioning` resource whose status is explicitly set to `Suspended`. The rule reports the insecure attribute and provides a machine-applicable replacement.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This tutorial creates a Terraform rule that detects an `aws_s3_bucket_versioning` resource whose status is explicitly set to `Suspended`. The rule reports the insecure attribute and provides a suggested static remediation.
```

> This focused example does not detect S3 buckets that have no versioning resource. To cover missing resources, provider-version differences, modules, and Terraform plan JSON, clone Datadog's default S3 versioning rule.

Reviewer: Not convinced this last part is needed IMHO it does not adds any relevant info for a tutorial
```suggestion

```

> ## Start the rule

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Create the rule
```

1. Navigate to the [IaC Rules][1] page.
2. Click {{< ui >}}Create rule{{< /ui >}}.
3. Enter a rule name, such as `S3 bucket versioning is suspended`.
4. Select **Terraform** as the platform.
5. Select a category and severity. You can also set **AWS** as the provider and specify a CWE.

## Add a sample file

Under {{< ui >}}Test your policy{{< /ui >}}, replace the starter sample with:

```hcl
resource "aws_s3_bucket" "reports" {
  bucket = "example-reports-bucket"
}

resource "aws_s3_bucket_versioning" "reports" {
  bucket = aws_s3_bucket.reports.id

  versioning_configuration {
    status = "Suspended"
  }
}
```

Datadog parses Terraform resources under `input.document[i].resource`, grouped by resource type and resource label. The rule can select the versioning resource with:

```rego
some i, name
versioning := input.document[i].resource.aws_s3_bucket_versioning[name]
```

In this expression, `i` identifies the parsed document and `name` is the Terraform resource label, `reports`.

## Write the detection condition

> The sample is noncompliant when its versioning status is `Suspended`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The rule produces a finding when the versioning status is `Suspended`:
```

```rego
versioning.versioning_configuration.status == "Suspended"
```

> Rego expressions must all evaluate successfully for the rule to produce a finding. A missing field is undefined and does not satisfy this equality check.

Reviewer: ❓- Not sure I understand what `A missing field is undefined and does not satisfy this equality check.` refers to, could we simplify this part ?

## Build the finding

Under {{< ui >}}Rego policy{{< /ui >}}, replace the starter policy with:

```rego
package datadog

import data.generic.terraform as tf_lib

DatadogPolicy contains result if {
	some i, name
	versioning := input.document[i].resource.aws_s3_bucket_versioning[name]
	versioning.versioning_configuration.status == "Suspended"

	result := {
		"documentId": input.document[i].id,
		"resourceType": "aws_s3_bucket_versioning",
		"resourceName": tf_lib.resolve_s3_bucket_name(versioning, name),
		"searchKey": sprintf("aws_s3_bucket_versioning[%s].versioning_configuration.status", [name]),
		"remediation": json.marshal({
			"before": "Suspended",
			"after": "Enabled",
		}),
		"remediationType": "replacement",
	}
}
```

The policy:

- Selects each `aws_s3_bucket_versioning` resource.
- Produces a finding only when the status is `Suspended`.
- Uses the Terraform shared library to derive a useful resource name.
- Points `searchKey` to the exact insecure attribute.
- Encodes the existing and replacement values for an automated fix.

> ## Test triggering and compliant configurations

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Test the rule
```
